---
title: 'Fix: Logitech Touchpad T650 not Working on Windows 10'
comments: true
tags:
  - Peripherals
  - Logitech
  - T650
  - Windows 10
date: '2020-04-27 10:00 -0400'
---

Logitech is probably my favorite peripheral maker of all time. Recently I remembered that I had a T650 touchpad that I hadn't used in a long time and I decided to give it a shot.

## Problem

When I paired the touchpad, it didn't look like any of the gestures worked in Windows 10, and I couldn't find it in the settings app despite having clearly paired it. Furthermore, the settings app that listed it said there were no updates for the device.

## Solution

In this case, the issue was that there indeed _was_ a firmware update for the device. It just wasn't showing in the settings app.

* I noted the firmware version of my device was `041.000.00033`
* I found [the downloads page for the T650](https://support.logi.com/hc/en-us/articles/360024699134--Downloads-Wireless-Rechargeable-Touchpad-T650).
* The only download shown by default was the firmware update tool -- but this isn't the correct tool.
* I clicked `Show all downloads`, and selected `Windows 10` as my OS.

Towards the bottom of the page, I saw the magic words: "Firmware update". The version number? `041.001.00038` -- a higher version number than my firmware.

I downloaded the file and ran it -- but nothing happened. Hmm. That's not great.

I had to:

* Go into the logitech unifying receiver app
* Click the `Advanced...` button at the bottom left corner
* Click the T650 in the list

**NOW** I could see the update firmware button (which had previously been disabled). Success! I clicked the button, followed the instructions, and the firmware opened successfully.

It would have been great for Logitech to provide a little more insight in their firmware update exe (or any output at all), but it was released in like 2014, so I'll forgive them.

If you found this, I hope it helped you resolve the issue. Happy scrolling!
